---
layout: post
title: CIDM Europe 2014
tags: [user assistance]
---

The Center for Information Design Management ([CIDM](https://www.infomanagementcenter.com/)) hosted Content Management Strategies/DITA Europe 2014 in Munich, Germany, on November 18 and 19. The two-day conference featured a variety of speakers and experts in Darwin Information Typing Architecture (DITA), plus two exhibition spaces for vendors.

### The idea

For those uninitiated in DITA, it’s an XML data model you can set up together with a content management system to publish any sort of handbook on the fly, or to serve up online content users need when they need it. DITA is already changing the world of technical content, as more and more companies like SAP use it to publish tens of thousands of pages of online content (such as user assistance for their [HANA system](http://www.sap.com/product/technology-platform/hana.html)).

All of this points to a growing trend of treating content as any other form of data, by packaging and reusing it, as well as by quantifying its economic benefits. Once you learn the methodology, you realize that DITA has some pretty powerful capabilities. By structuring your content as topics and encoding the whole thing in XML, you individually tag each topic and both current and future applications can simply use those tags to present content any way you (and users) determine.

To get the most out of DITA, you should convert all your content, from marketing literature to internal documentation. This tends to unify your message across the company and allows economies of scale to be achieved regarding costs and benefits. But not all companies do this, preferring to DITA-fy only their customer-facing technical content like online help and user manuals.

### Case studies

What I most enjoyed most about the conference was the case studies, such as the SAP HANA system and others, showing what went well and not so well. Don’t get me wrong; I like DITA but in the real world there are many speed bumps to implementation. DITA’s much more than an open toolkit. For starters, going from a book- or document-based content model to structured writing in an almost pure XML environment takes some effort. Even the IT department has to get involved to set up dedicated servers and keep latency at bay. At some companies, DITA’s been tried but then tossed aside as management realized it’s a mindset as well as a tool, a fact they hadn't counted on.

### Trends in DITA

Also presented were topics on trends in Lean Manufacturing and Industry 4.0, which require new information models for technical content. As manufacturing businesses adapt to new production technologies, they’ll change their processes and information flows. Particularly in Industry 4.0, production will become much more automated as components begin “talking” with each other and information systems tie together to present a unified picture of a given product. For example, product information will increasingly pull in data from disparate sources about features, costs, performance, etc., into one content model. DITA is well suited to these requirements as an adaptable XML-based open standard.

### Conclusions

One key takeaway from the conference was evidence of growing DITA adoption in Europe. Having been created in the United States, DITA is finding its way into more European companies, with particular focus on countries with high rates of English fluency, like England and the Netherlands. Adoption rates in more southern countries like Greece and Spain is slower. It’s also being adopted by German manufacturing companies, which are switching from document-centric information architectures to topic-based writing.

The conference had something to offer everyone. Beyond DITA, it's a good place to learn about general trends in technical content and to make new connections.
